Okay, our tape recorders are rolling on this end.
How long did you know, Howard?
I don't remember just exactly when they moved to Cross Plains. It seemed to me
like it was around 19 and 20 or 21. And that's when I first became acquainted
with him. He was probably 13 years old, something like that at that time.
What was he like when he was a little boy? Be your pardon? What was he like when
he was a boy at 13? Oh, he was just another kid that just, you know, just
average small-town boy. His father was a doctor, you know, just a country
doctor.
And his mother was Irish,
and she liked to use
her Irish brogue. You know, she really practiced on that.
But Robert was very studious in school. He didn't get out and play with the
other kids a lot like most kids do.
Yeah, we lived right back by the other side of their house. We lived in the
house just east of their house.
Do you know when he got interested in writing?
No, but it was before he finished high school, and I don't remember just when he
finished high school, probably about...
well, let's see. Probably about 1923, somewhere along there. But he was already
writing those stories. Weird Tales was the magazine that published most of them.
Did you read any of them when they came out? no I tried I didn't get interested
in them I was well it just wasn't the type of stuff I was interested in I was
more interested in the western story type stuff that they published at that time
yeah he wrote he wrote some western stories too if I remember correctly did you
ever read any of those? I don't remember. I might have. I don't remember. Do you
remember if he ever talked much about the stuff he was writing about or if he
was kind of closed about that? No, he wasn't close about it or anything. But
it's been so long ago that I don't remember. You know, there's been a lifetime
in there that's gone by and I just don't remember.
Okay. Okay.
Do you remember by any chance any
stories about Robert? would any particular thing come to mind that was memorable
about him? Well, about just his home life, his private life there.
He had a, out in the backyard, he always kept a big log there, a tree trunk, you
know, and a big sledgehammer. I guess the thing would have weighed 12 or 14
pounds. and he'd get out and for his exercise, for his daily exercise, he would
get out there and beat on that log with that big old sledgehammer until have it
beat to pieces and he'd get another log. But he was exceptionally strong due to
the fact that he exercised with this heavy hammer, you know. and he'd do that
well for an hour maybe or longer just beat on that log with that big old heavy
sledgehammer
then he had a dog just a big old cur dog and his name was Patch P-A-T-C-H and
when he was mealtime came and he'd fix up whatever the dog was going to eat and
get out in the backyard and start calling the dog. He'd call it Chuck Patch.
Chuck Patch, he'd call that a half a dozen times. This old dog would come around
wherever he was. But it was Chuck Time. so that was
principally the things that he did
later on he bought a car and he'd take rides out in the country sometime with
Lindsey Tyson was a very good friend of his single and they'd go out in the
country together in his car just ride around I judge Now, Lindsey is dead, so
you won't get to talk to him.
When did he die? Thank you, pardon? When did Mr. Tyson die? Oh, just recently,
about two or three years ago. Oh, okay. Okay. Yeah, I've read about him and some
of the research I've done on Mr. Howard.
Do you know if Howard was into hunting, and a lot of West Texans sont really big
on hunting, do you know if Howard was a hunter? He never did, so far as I know.
As far as I know, he did not own a rifle or a shotgun. He did buy a pistol, and
that was the gun he killed himself with. and if I remember right it's been so
long ago I think it was a .32-20 caliber Colt I may be wrong about the caliber
but I think that's what it was yeah on some of the stuff that I've read I've
read a lot of different things one of the people said that some of the people in
cross planes had a feeling that Howard was going to commit suicide sometime
because of his personality. Did you ever get that impression? What we heard, and
my wife and I were in California when he died, and this was in 1936 or 37,
somewhere along there, his mother got sick and it was terminal and Robert told
his daddy he says I don't want to live after my mother's gone and so when his
mother died he went out in the car and sat down and shot himself
John K. One of the things we've been trying, of course a lot of people have been
trying to figure this out because ours has become rather famous over the years,
is why he would have done that. You probably knew him further well. Could you
give any speculation as to why he would have gone out and shot himself and his
mother died i don't know like i say my wife and i were in california at that
time and we had lost contact with them but uh robert never married he never
seemed interested in girls and uh he did have one girlfriend there in
crossplains for a time i'd see him out in the car driving around once in a while
but i don't think that lasted too long, he was just wrapped up in his, in his
work, writing those stories. And he had a glassed-end back porch on the
southeast side of the house there. And it wasn't too far from my mother's
bedroom. And a lot of times at night, he would wake her up with a typewriter
clicking, you know, at one and two o'clock in the morning, some inspiration, and
he'd probably be laying there in bed and think of something, and he'd get up and
write it down right quick.
And he just worked all the hours, you know, whenever he'd think of something, he
wanted to put in a story.
Yeah, that's very interesting. That's very interesting. I don't know. I kind of
wondered myself. You know, he did ride a whole lot rather quickly. And I just
kind of wonder if he was burning himself out. He could possibly have been.
However, the last time I saw him, which was along about 1934, 1935, he seemed in
good health.
Yeah. About that last time you saw him, what do you remember about that? Well,
nothing in particular. Just, you know, we'd say hello across the fence and talk
a few minutes.
When we were still kids, Francis Bannerman and Sons was a big mail order house
in New York that handled all kinds of armaments and things from medieval times
on up to modern. And we had ordered a couple of little, and they weren't
pinching swords in that sense. I don't know just exactly the name of them, but
they had a round hilt on them, you know, where you'd protect your hands. But we
ordered those things, and we'd get out in the backyard and wrap a bandana hatch
around our heads like a parrot. And we'd get out and fence with those things. Of
course, we didn't dare, you know, hit each other with them because they'd have
gone through you. But we did that quite a bit. But we had an immense live oak
tree in our backyard, and we'd get out there and shade that old tree in. pretend
that we were back maybe in the dark ages or something or in the time of the
Spanish thing things like that he had things like that on his mind all the time
yeah I guess that I guess that sort of with how his imagination worked he had a
very vivid imagination yes he did
okay let's see
um i've about covered all my questions here i didn't want to take up too much of
your time He had some relatives in Ranger, Texas. Have you contacted anyone in
Ranger? No, sir. There may be. They might have passed away by now. But he had
some ants, one or two ants, I believe it was, in Ranger. And they were the only
heirs to the Howard Estate there. And they were up until, oh, two or three years
ago, I think. Some of them were still living and still drawing bodies, some of
his stories that were still being published.
Yeah.
I've heard of them. We haven't attempted to talk with them. I'm sure DeCamp, is
that his name, DeCamp? Yes, sir. I'm sure he contacted them and you'll probably
get all that information from him. Yeah.
Um... And Jack Scott, as far as I know, is your best authority there in Cross
Plains on Robert. Yeah, I've talked to Mr. Scott before. He was quite helpful.
he recommended talking to Mr. Scott Baum, and Mr. Scott Baum said, well, you
need to call Leroy Butler. He knew him too. So we've been kind of going, you
know, from one to the other to the other.
And I think we've probably got enough information here. We may call Mr. Scott
again to see if he's
remembered anything else, because there's going to be probably a lot of
publicity or at least some publicity about Howard in conjunction with the movie
that's coming out in the latter part of May I do know this
during the time of the Depression you know until his death had the best income
of anyone in Cross Plains including the bankers and the school teachers and all
the other professions there, that Robert's income from his stories was bringing
in more money than anybody else in Cross Plains was drawing.
Yeah. Yeah, that's interesting. More money than the bunkers, too, huh? Uh-huh.
Nobody laughed at those stories, I bet. That's right.
Alright, Mr. Butler, I think I've covered anything. I sure do appreciate it.
Why, you're quite welcome.